---
title: 'Random initialization in pre-trained GNN'
date: 2022-12-20
permalink: /posts/2022/12/rand-init/
tags:
  - Graph Neural Network
---
Summary: The random initialized embeddings is equivalent to multiple a random matrix to the original feature matrix. The value of each dimension in generated embeddings are the weighted summation of values of each dimension in original features. In the random initialization, the embeddings are still distinguishable since the 'weights' are randomly generated and not identical. In ogb datasets with enough training data, the downstream classifier can still fit it.

## Notions

- $W$ are random initialized learnable parameters
- $\tilde{A}=D^{-\frac{1}{2}}AD^{-\frac{1}{2}}$
- node features: $X$
- embeddings: $H$

## GGD setting:

- 2-layer GCN encoder:

  $$
  H = \sigma(\tilde{A}\sigma(\tilde{A}XW_1)W_2)
  $$
- pre-train task:

  - $proj(\cdot)$ is a MLP and sum function
  - $bincls(\cdot)$ is a binary classifier for pre-train task
  - binary classification: $proj(H)$ and $proj(H_{corupt})$
- downstream task:

  - $cls(\cdot)$ is a linear classifier
  - output: $cls(H)$

    $$
    cls(H) = H\Theta = \sigma(\tilde{A}\sigma(\tilde{A}XW_1)W_2)\Theta
    $$

## Random initialization effect analysis

- The embeddings used to node classification task in self-supervised learning: $H = \sigma(\tilde{A}^2XW)$, with a linear classifier.
- The features used to node classification supervised learning: $\tilde{A}^2X$, with a non-linear classifier. (if we ignore the non-linearity in GNN encoder)

In GGD framework, we only consider $W$ in downstream node classification task. To simplify this problem, we can consider the node classification task in GGD framework as the classification on $H=XW$ and the supervised training as the the classification on $X$. So the difference between them are the weight matrix $W$.

The original feature $X$ is:

$$
X=
\left[\begin{matrix}
x_{11} & x_{12} &...& x_{1n}\\
x_{21} & x_{22} &...& x_{2n}\\
&...&...\\
x_{n1} & x_{n2} &...& x_{nn}
\end{matrix}\right]
$$

for node $u$:

$$
X_u=[x_{u1},x_{u2},...,x_{un}]
$$

The L2-distance between node $u$ and node $v$: $dis(\mathbf{x}_u,\mathbf{x}_v)=\|\mathbf{x}_u-\mathbf{x}_v\|_2^2=\sum_i^n(x_{ui}-x_{vi})^2$

The weight matrix $W$ is:

$$
W=
\left[\begin{matrix}
w_{11} & w_{12} &...& w_{1n}\\
w_{21} & w_{22} &...& w_{2n}\\
&...&...\\
w_{n1} & w_{n2} &...& w_{nn}
\end{matrix}\right]
$$

and final embeddings $H$:

$$
H=XW=
\left[\begin{matrix}
\sum_i^n x_{1i}w_{i1} & \sum_i^n x_{1i}w_{i2} &...& \sum_i^n x_{1i}w_{in}\\
\sum_i^n x_{2i}w_{i1} & \sum_i^n x_{2i}w_{i2} &...& \sum_i^n x_{2i}w_{in}\\
&...&...\\
\sum_i^n x_{ni}w_{i1} & \sum_i^n x_{ni}w_{i2} &...& \sum_i^n x_{ni}w_{in}
\end{matrix}\right]
$$

the embedding of node $u$:

$$
H_u=[\sum_i^n x_{ui}w_{i1},\sum_i^n x_{ui}w_{i2},...,\sum_i^n x_{ui}w_{in}]
$$

We can see that the embedding values are the weighted summation of original features. The L2-distance between node $u$ and node $v$: $dis(\mathbf{h}_u,\mathbf{h}_v)=\|\mathbf{h}_u-\mathbf{h}_v\|
_2^2=\sum_j^n(\sum_i^n(x_{ui}-x_{vi})w_{ij})^2$.

In 0 epoch without training, the $W$ is random initialized as $W_{random}$. Different to add a random noise, the operation of multiplying a random matrix  $W_{random}$ will not mask the original feature, but can be regarded random weighted summation of the original features. The distinction in random generated $W_{random}$ is evident, which means the distinction in embedding $XW_{random}$ is also evident. So the performance of classification is also good enough. If we use the constant initialization $W_c$ with all the elements in it are the same, we will lose distinction in embedding $XW_c$ and thus we can not implement classification task.

I have done some simple experiments to verify it. In supervised tasks (with 60%~80% training size), I multiple a random matrix $W_{random}$ to the original node feature, the classification performance is close to the classification on original features (on some simple datasets such as cora and citeseer).
